$Id: README,v 1.3 2014/04/22 19:56:12 stevew Exp $

This is BSIM6.0 Release 05-MAY-2013

The complete package, which includes the PDF manual, is available from
UC Berkeley:

      http://www-device.eecs.berkeley.edu/bsim/?page=BSIM6

The manual will also probably be available in the "docs" directory of
the distribution repository at http://wrcad.com (password protected,
for customers only).

This is a "high priority" model, which will be supported in WRspice to
the fullest extent possible.  At present, all benchmarks run correctly
and there are no known issues.  Full QA results are available in a
separate download.

There is an ongoing attempt to rewrite the model so as to avoid
numerical trouble at very low temperatures.  The patched version
and the patch itself are also included.

This *MUST* be built with the adms-2.3.0-wr package obtained from
wrcad.com, in the "free software" area.

A pre-built module is available in the "module_dist" directory.

To build:

0.  Make sure that the admst-2.3.0-wr package is installed on your
system.  This is available from the free software area of wrcad.com. 
The package has important improvements and bug fixes, and is required
for building modules for WRspice.  Use of another adms distribution
will cause trouble.

1.  If you are reading this from the WRspice installation area, copy
this directory to a personal work area, and work from there.  Below,
"this directory" implies the copied directory (with its files and
any sub-directories).

2.  The Makefile has been provided.  Have a look at the top part of
the file where the configuration variables are set, and read the
comments.  Make any desired changes.

3.  Type "make".  This will create and compile the C++ files, eventually
producing the loadable module named "bsim6.so" ("bsim6.dylib" in OS X).

4.  Use the devload command or -m command-line option in WRspice to
load the module.  You will then be able to run the examples.

