
Dear Dr. Krummenacher,

Thank you for sending the ekv-2.6 files.  I have incorporated the
model into my WRspice simulator, as well as into the ngspice simulator
from the Internet.

I have run into some difficulty, though, and may have found a problem
in the code.  As it seems that the file in question (ekvcap.c) has
been stable for a couple of years, and the EKV model seems to be
fairly widely used, there may be some other cause for the problem
described below.  I would appreciate any help from your group
concerning this.

The problem relates to extremely poor convergence in transient
analysis.  Although everything seemed to be working, and I could
simulate the i-v curves and such things using dc analysis quite
effectively, I could not use the model in transient analysis. 
Inevitably, for all but the most trivial of circuits, the simulation
would halt with a "timestep too small" message.  Both simulators
(WRspice and ngspice) exhibited this behavior.

After quite a bit of head scratching and experimentation, I have come
to suspect that the sign is reversed for the three capacitance terms
computed in the ekvcap.c file.  In particular, the lines starting at
line 268 of this file are

	*cgs = dQG_dVS;
	*cgd = dQG_dVD;
	*cgb = -(dQG_dVG + dQG_dVD + dQG_dVS);

In the documentation section 6.2.1 (page 14), the formula for
capacitance appears with a negative sign, i.e.,

    Cxy = -dQx/dVy, for x != y

When I changed the signs of the three terms above in ekvcap.c, the
convergence problems disappeared.  With the original code, these three
capacitances were negative, which would explain the numerical
instability.  With the sign change, these capacitances approximately
match the capacitances obtained with the "simple" (XQC=1) capacitance
calculation at the end of ekvcap.c.  Using the simple model also
clears up the convergence problem.


Regards,

Steve Whiteley, PhD
President, Whiteley Research Inc.
www.wrcad.com
